{\rtf1\ansi\deff0{\fonttbl{\f0 Times New Roman;}}\f0\fs24 The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Yellow Wallpaper\par     \par This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and\par most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions\par whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms\par of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online\par at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,\par you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located\par before using this eBook.\par \par Title: The Yellow Wallpaper\par \par Author: Charlotte Perkins Gilman\par \par \par         \par Release date: November 1, 1999 [eBook #1952]\par                 Most recently updated: August 31, 2024\par \par Language: English\par \par Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/1952\par \par Credits: An Anonymous Volunteer and David Widger\par \par \par *** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE YELLOW WALLPAPER ***\par \par \par \par \par The Yellow Wallpaper\par \par By Charlotte Perkins Gilman\par \par \par It is very seldom that mere ordinary people like John and myself secure\par ancestral halls for the summer.\par \par A colonial mansion, a hereditary estate, I would say a haunted house,\par and reach the height of romantic felicity?but that would be asking too\par much of fate!\par \par Still I will proudly declare that there is something queer about it.\par \par Else, why should it be let so cheaply? And why have stood so long\par untenanted?\par \par John laughs at me, of course, but one expects that in marriage.\par \par John is practical in the extreme. He has no patience with faith, an\par intense horror of superstition, and he scoffs openly at any talk of\par things not to be felt and seen and put down in figures.\par \par John is a physician, and perhaps?(I would not say it to a living soul,\par of course, but this is dead paper and a great relief to my\par mind)?perhaps that is one reason I do not get well faster.\par \par You see, he does not believe I am sick!\par \par And what can one do?\par \par If a physician of high standing, and one?s own husband, assures friends\par and relatives that there is really nothing the matter with one but\par temporary nervous depression?a slight hysterical tendency?what is one\par to do?\par \par My brother is also a physician, and also of high standing, and he says\par the same thing.\par \par So I take phosphates or phosphites?whichever it is, and tonics, and\par journeys, and air, and exercise, and am absolutely forbidden to ?work?\par until I am well again.\par \par Personally, I disagree with their ideas.\par \par Personally, I believe that congenial work, with excitement and change,\par would do me good.\par \par But what is one to do?\par \par I did write for a while in spite of them; but it does exhaust me a good\par deal?having to be so sly about it, or else meet with heavy opposition.\par \par I sometimes fancy that in my condition if I had less opposition and\par more society and stimulus?but John says the very worst thing I can do\par is to think about my condition, and I confess it always makes me feel\par bad.\par \par So I will let it alone and talk about the house.\par \par The most beautiful place! It is quite alone, standing well back from\par the road, quite three miles from the village. It makes me think of\par English places that you read about, for there are hedges and walls and\par gates that lock, and lots of separate little houses for the gardeners\par and people.\par \par There is a delicious garden! I never saw such a garden?large and shady,\par full of box-bordered paths, and lined with long grape-covered arbors\par with seats under them.\par \par There were greenhouses, too, but they are all broken now.\par \par There was some legal trouble, I believe, something about the heirs and\par co-heirs; anyhow, the place has been empty for years.\par \par That spoils my ghostliness, I am afraid; but I don?t care?there is\par something strange about the house?I can feel it.\par \par I even said so to John one moonlight evening, but he said what I felt\par was a draught, and shut the window.\par \par I get unreasonably angry with John sometimes. I?m sure I never used to\par be so sensitive. I think it is due to this nervous condition.\par \par But John says if I feel so I shall neglect proper self-control; so I\par take pains to control myself,?before him, at least,?and that makes me\par very tired.\par \par I don?t like our room a bit. I wanted one downstairs that opened on the\par piazza and had roses all over the window, and such pretty old-fashioned\par chintz hangings! but John would not hear of it.\par \par He said there was only one window and not room for two beds, and no\par near room for him if he took another.\par \par He is very careful and loving, and hardly lets me stir without special\par direction.\par \par I have a schedule prescription for each hour in the day; he takes all\par care from me, and so I feel basely ungrateful not to value it more.\par \par He said we came here solely on my account, that I was to have perfect\par rest and all the air I could get. ?Your exercise depends on your\par strength, my dear,? said he, ?and your food somewhat on your appetite;\par but air you can absorb all the time.? So we took the nursery, at the\par top of the house.\par \par It is a big, airy room, the whole floor nearly, with windows that look\par all ways, and air and sunshine galore. It was nursery first and then\par playground and gymnasium, I should judge; for the windows are barred\par for little children, and there are rings and things in the walls.\par \par The paint and paper look as if a boys? school had used it. It is\par stripped off?the paper?in great patches all around the head of my bed,\par about as far as I can reach, and in a great place on the other side of\par the room low down. I never saw a worse paper in my life.\par \par One of those sprawling flamboyant patterns committing every artistic\par sin.\par \par It is dull enough to confuse the eye in following, pronounced enough to\par constantly irritate, and provoke study, and when you follow the lame,\par uncertain curves for a little distance they suddenly commit\par suicide?plunge off at outrageous angles, destroy themselves in\par unheard-of contradictions.\par \par The color is repellant, almost revolting; a smouldering, unclean\par yellow, strangely faded by the slow-turning sunlight.\par \par It is a dull yet lurid orange in some places, a sickly sulphur tint in\par others.\par \par No wonder the children hated it! I should hate it myself if I had to\par live in this room long.\par \par There comes John, and I must put this away,?he hates to have me write a\par word.\par \par We have been here two weeks, and I haven?t felt like writing before,\par since that first day.\par \par I am sitting by the window now, up in this atrocious nursery, and there\par is nothing to hinder my writing as much as I please, save lack of\par strength.\par \par John is away all day, and even some nights when his cases are serious.\par \par I am glad my case is not serious!\par \par But these nervous troubles are dreadfully depressing.\par \par John does not know how much I really suffer. He knows there is no\par reason to suffer, and that satisfies him.\par \par Of course it is only nervousness. It does weigh on me so not to do my\par duty in any way!\par \par I meant to be such a help to John, such a real rest and comfort, and\par here I am a comparative burden already!\par \par Nobody would believe what an effort it is to do what little I am\par able?to dress and entertain, and order things.\par \par It is fortunate Mary is so good with the baby. Such a dear baby!\par \par And yet I cannot be with him, it makes me so nervous.\par \par I suppose John never was nervous in his life. He laughs at me so about\par this wallpaper!\par \par At first he meant to repaper the room, but afterwards he said that I\par was letting it get the better of me, and that nothing was worse for a\par nervous patient than to give way to such fancies.\par \par He said that after the wallpaper was changed it would be the heavy\par bedstead, and then the barred windows, and then that gate at the head\par of the stairs, and so on.\par \par ?You know the place is doing you good,? he said, ?and really, dear, I\par don?t care to renovate the house just for a three months? rental.?\par \par ?Then do let us go downstairs,? I said, ?there are such pretty rooms\par there.?\par \par Then he took me in his arms and called me a blessed little goose, and\par said he would go down cellar if I wished, and have it whitewashed into\par the bargain.\par \par But he is right enough about the beds and windows and things.\par \par It is as airy and comfortable a room as any one need wish, and, of\par course, I would not be so silly as to make him uncomfortable just for a\par whim.\par \par I?m really getting quite fond of the big room, all but that horrid\par paper.\par \par Out of one window I can see the garden, those mysterious deep-shaded\par arbors, the riotous old-fashioned flowers, and bushes and gnarly trees.\par \par Out of another I get a lovely view of the bay and a little private\par wharf belonging to the estate. There is a beautiful shaded lane that\par runs down there from the house. I always fancy I see people walking in\par these numerous paths and arbors, but John has cautioned me not to give\par way to fancy in the least. He says that with my imaginative power and\par habit of story-making a nervous weakness like mine is sure to lead to\par all manner of excited fancies, and that I ought to use my will and good\par sense to check the tendency. So I try.\par \par I think sometimes that if I were only well enough to write a little it\par would relieve the press of ideas and rest me.\par \par But I find I get pretty tired when I try.\par \par It is so discouraging not to have any advice and companionship about my\par work. When I get really well John says we will ask Cousin Henry and\par Julia down for a long visit; but he says he would as soon put\par fire-works in my pillow-case as to let me have those stimulating people\par about now.\par \par I wish I could get well faster.\par \par But I must not think about that. This paper looks to me as if it knew\par what a vicious influence it had!\par \par There is a recurrent spot where the pattern lolls like a broken neck\par and two bulbous eyes stare at you upside-down.\par \par I get positively angry with the impertinence of it and the\par everlastingness. Up and down and sideways they crawl, and those absurd,\par unblinking eyes are everywhere. There is one place where two breadths\par didn?t match, and the eyes go all up and down the line, one a little\par higher than the other.\par \par I never saw so much expression in an inanimate thing before, and we all\par know how much expression they have! I used to lie awake as a child and\par get more entertainment and terror out of blank walls and plain\par furniture than most children could find in a toy-store.\par \par I remember what a kindly wink the knobs of our big old bureau used to\par have, and there was one chair that always seemed like a strong friend.\par \par I used to feel that if any of the other things looked too fierce I\par could always hop into that chair and be safe.\par \par The furniture in this room is no worse than inharmonious, however, for\par we had to bring it all from downstairs. I suppose when this was used as\par a playroom they had to take the nursery things out, and no wonder! I\par never saw such ravages as the children have made here.\par \par The wallpaper, as I said before, is torn off in spots, and it sticketh\par closer than a brother?they must have had perseverance as well as\par hatred.\par \par Then the floor is scratched and gouged and splintered, the plaster\par itself is dug out here and there, and this great heavy bed, which is\par all we found in the room, looks as if it had been through the wars.\par \par But I don?t mind it a bit?only the paper.\par \par There comes John?s sister. Such a dear girl as she is, and so careful\par of me! I must not let her find me writing.\par \par She is a perfect, and enthusiastic housekeeper, and hopes for no better\par profession. I verily believe she thinks it is the writing which made me\par sick!\par \par But I can write when she is out, and see her a long way off from these\par windows.\par \par There is one that commands the road, a lovely, shaded, winding road,\par and one that just looks off over the country. A lovely country, too,\par full of great elms and velvet meadows.\par \par This wallpaper has a kind of sub-pattern in a different shade, a\par particularly irritating one, for you can only see it in certain lights,\par and not clearly then.\par \par But in the places where it isn?t faded, and where the sun is just so, I\par can see a strange, provoking, formless sort of figure, that seems to\par sulk about behind that silly and conspicuous front design.\par \par There?s sister on the stairs!\par \par Well, the Fourth of July is over! The people are gone and I am tired\par out. John thought it might do me good to see a little company, so we\par just had mother and Nellie and the children down for a week.\par \par Of course I didn?t do a thing. Jennie sees to everything now.\par \par But it tired me all the same.\par \par John says if I don?t pick up faster he shall send me to Weir Mitchell\par in the fall.\par \par But I don?t want to go there at all. I had a friend who was in his\par hands once, and she says he is just like John and my brother, only more\par so!\par \par Besides, it is such an undertaking to go so far.\par \par I don?t feel as if it was worth while to turn my hand over for\par anything, and I?m getting dreadfully fretful and querulous.\par \par I cry at nothing, and cry most of the time.\par \par Of course I don?t when John is here, or anybody else, but when I am\par alone.\par \par And I am alone a good deal just now. John is kept in town very often by\par serious cases, and Jennie is good and lets me alone when I want her to.\par \par So I walk a little in the garden or down that lovely lane, sit on the\par porch under the roses, and lie down up here a good deal.\par \par I?m getting really fond of the room in spite of the wallpaper. Perhaps\par because of the wallpaper.\par \par It dwells in my mind so!\par \par I lie here on this great immovable bed?it is nailed down, I believe?and\par follow that pattern about by the hour. It is as good as gymnastics, I\par assure you. I start, we?ll say, at the bottom, down in the corner over\par there where it has not been touched, and I determine for the thousandth\par time that I will follow that pointless pattern to some sort of a\par conclusion.\par \par I know a little of the principle of design, and I know this thing was\par not arranged on any laws of radiation, or alternation, or repetition,\par or symmetry, or anything else that I ever heard of.\par \par It is repeated, of course, by the breadths, but not otherwise.\par \par Looked at in one way each breadth stands alone, the bloated curves and\par flourishes?a kind of ?debased Romanesque? with delirium tremens?go\par waddling up and down in isolated columns of fatuity.\par \par But, on the other hand, they connect diagonally, and the sprawling\par outlines run off in great slanting waves of optic horror, like a lot of\par wallowing seaweeds in full chase.\par \par The whole thing goes horizontally, too, at least it seems so, and I\par exhaust myself in trying to distinguish the order of its going in that\par direction.\par \par They have used a horizontal breadth for a frieze, and that adds\par wonderfully to the confusion.\par \par There is one end of the room where it is almost intact, and there, when\par the cross-lights fade and the low sun shines directly upon it, I can\par almost fancy radiation after all,?the interminable grotesques seem to\par form around a common centre and rush off in headlong plunges of equal\par distraction.\par \par It makes me tired to follow it. I will take a nap, I guess.\par \par I don?t know why I should write this.\par \par I don?t want to.\par \par I don?t feel able.\par \par And I know John would think it absurd. But I must say what I feel and\par think in some way?it is such a relief!\par \par But the effort is getting to be greater than the relief.\par \par Half the time now I am awfully lazy, and lie down ever so much.\par \par John says I mustn?t lose my strength, and has me take cod-liver oil and\par lots of tonics and things, to say nothing of ale and wine and rare\par meat.\par \par Dear John! He loves me very dearly, and hates to have me sick. I tried\par to have a real earnest reasonable talk with him the other day, and tell\par him how I wish he would let me go and make a visit to Cousin Henry and\par Julia.\par \par But he said I wasn?t able to go, nor able to stand it after I got\par there; and I did not make out a very good case for myself, for I was\par crying before I had finished.\par \par It is getting to be a great effort for me to think straight. Just this\par nervous weakness, I suppose.\par \par And dear John gathered me up in his arms, and just carried me upstairs\par and laid me on the bed, and sat by me and read to me till it tired my\par head.\par \par He said I was his darling and his comfort and all he had, and that I\par must take care of myself for his sake, and keep well.\par \par He says no one but myself can help me out of it, that I must use my\par will and self-control and not let any silly fancies run away with me.\par \par There?s one comfort, the baby is well and happy, and does not have to\par occupy this nursery with the horrid wallpaper.\par \par If we had not used it that blessed child would have! What a fortunate\par escape! Why, I wouldn?t have a child of mine, an impressionable little\par thing, live in such a room for worlds.\par \par I never thought of it before, but it is lucky that John kept me here\par after all. I can stand it so much easier than a baby, you see.\par \par Of course I never mention it to them any more,?I am too wise,?but I\par keep watch of it all the same.\par \par There are things in that paper that nobody knows but me, or ever will.\par \par Behind that outside pattern the dim shapes get clearer every day.\par \par It is always the same shape, only very numerous.\par \par And it is like a woman stooping down and creeping about behind that\par pattern. I don?t like it a bit. I wonder?I begin to think?I wish John\par would take me away from here!\par \par It is so hard to talk with John about my case, because he is so wise,\par and because he loves me so.\par \par But I tried it last night.\par \par It was moonlight. The moon shines in all around, just as the sun does.\par \par I hate to see it sometimes, it creeps so slowly, and always comes in by\par one window or another.\par \par John was asleep and I hated to waken him, so I kept still and watched\par the moonlight on that undulating wallpaper till I felt creepy.\par \par The faint figure behind seemed to shake the pattern, just as if she\par wanted to get out.\par \par I got up softly and went to feel and see if the paper did move, and\par when I came back John was awake.\par \par ?What is it, little girl?? he said. ?Don?t go walking about like\par that?you?ll get cold.?\par \par I thought it was a good time to talk, so I told him that I really was\par not gaining here, and that I wished he would take me away.\par \par ?Why darling!? said he, ?our lease will be up in three weeks, and I\par can?t see how to leave before.\par \par ?The repairs are not done at home, and I cannot possibly leave town\par just now. Of course if you were in any danger I could and would, but\par you really are better, dear, whether you can see it or not. I am a\par doctor, dear, and I know. You are gaining flesh and color, your\par appetite is better. I feel really much easier about you.?\par \par ?I don?t weigh a bit more,? said I, ?nor as much; and my appetite may\par be better in the evening, when you are here, but it is worse in the\par morning when you are away.?\par \par ?Bless her little heart!? said he with a big hug; ?she shall be as sick\par as she pleases! But now let?s improve the shining hours by going to\par sleep, and talk about it in the morning!?\par \par ?And you won?t go away?? I asked gloomily.\par \par ?Why, how can I, dear? It is only three weeks more and then we will\par take a nice little trip of a few days while Jennie is getting the house\par ready. Really, dear, you are better!?\par \par ?Better in body perhaps??I began, and stopped short, for he sat up\par straight and looked at me with such a stern, reproachful look that I\par could not say another word.\par \par ?My darling,? said he, ?I beg of you, for my sake and for our child?s\par sake, as well as for your own, that you will never for one instant let\par that idea enter your mind! There is nothing so dangerous, so\par fascinating, to a temperament like yours. It is a false and foolish\par fancy. Can you not trust me as a physician when I tell you so??\par \par So of course I said no more on that score, and we went to sleep before\par long. He thought I was asleep first, but I wasn?t,?I lay there for\par hours trying to decide whether that front pattern and the back pattern\par really did move together or separately.\par \par On a pattern like this, by daylight, there is a lack of sequence, a\par defiance of law, that is a constant irritant to a normal mind.\par \par The color is hideous enough, and unreliable enough, and infuriating\par enough, but the pattern is torturing.\par \par You think you have mastered it, but just as you get well under way in\par following, it turns a back somersault and there you are. It slaps you\par in the face, knocks you down, and tramples upon you. It is like a bad\par dream.\par \par The outside pattern is a florid arabesque, reminding one of a fungus.\par If you can imagine a toadstool in joints, an interminable string of\par toadstools, budding and sprouting in endless convolutions,?why, that is\par something like it.\par \par That is, sometimes!\par \par There is one marked peculiarity about this paper, a thing nobody seems\par to notice but myself, and that is that it changes as the light changes.\par \par When the sun shoots in through the east window?I always watch for that\par first long, straight ray?it changes so quickly that I never can quite\par believe it.\par \par That is why I watch it always.\par \par By moonlight?the moon shines in all night when there is a moon?I\par wouldn?t know it was the same paper.\par \par At night in any kind of light, in twilight, candlelight, lamplight, and\par worst of all by moonlight, it becomes bars! The outside pattern I mean,\par and the woman behind it is as plain as can be.\par \par I didn?t realize for a long time what the thing was that showed\par behind,?that dim sub-pattern,?but now I am quite sure it is a woman.\par \par By daylight she is subdued, quiet. I fancy it is the pattern that keeps\par her so still. It is so puzzling. It keeps me quiet by the hour.\par \par I lie down ever so much now. John says it is good for me, and to sleep\par all I can.\par \par Indeed, he started the habit by making me lie down for an hour after\par each meal.\par \par It is a very bad habit, I am convinced, for, you see, I don?t sleep.\par \par And that cultivates deceit, for I don?t tell them I?m awake,?oh, no!\par \par The fact is, I am getting a little afraid of John.\par \par He seems very queer sometimes, and even Jennie has an inexplicable\par look.\par \par It strikes me occasionally, just as a scientific hypothesis, that\par perhaps it is the paper!\par \par I have watched John when he did not know I was looking, and come into\par the room suddenly on the most innocent excuses, and I?ve caught him\par several times looking at the paper! And Jennie too. I caught Jennie\par with her hand on it once.\par \par She didn?t know I was in the room, and when I asked her in a quiet, a\par very quiet voice, with the most restrained manner possible, what she\par was doing with the paper she turned around as if she had been caught\par stealing, and looked quite angry?asked me why I should frighten her so!\par \par Then she said that the paper stained everything it touched, that she\par had found yellow smooches on all my clothes and John?s, and she wished\par we would be more careful!\par \par Did not that sound innocent? But I know she was studying that pattern,\par and I am determined that nobody shall find it out but myself!\par \par Life is very much more exciting now than it used to be. You see I have\par something more to expect, to look forward to, to watch. I really do eat\par better, and am more quiet than I was.\par \par John is so pleased to see me improve! He laughed a little the other\par day, and said I seemed to be flourishing in spite of my wallpaper.\par \par I turned it off with a laugh. I had no intention of telling him it was\par because of the wallpaper?he would make fun of me. He might even want to\par take me away.\par \par I don?t want to leave now until I have found it out. There is a week\par more, and I think that will be enough.\par \par I?m feeling ever so much better! I don?t sleep much at night, for it is\par so interesting to watch developments; but I sleep a good deal in the\par daytime.\par \par In the daytime it is tiresome and perplexing.\par \par There are always new shoots on the fungus, and new shades of yellow all\par over it. I cannot keep count of them, though I have tried\par conscientiously.\par \par It is the strangest yellow, that wallpaper! It makes me think of all\par the yellow things I ever saw?not beautiful ones like buttercups, but\par old foul, bad yellow things.\par \par But there is something else about that paper?the smell! I noticed it\par the moment we came into the room, but with so much air and sun it was\par not bad. Now we have had a week of fog and rain, and whether the\par windows are open or not, the smell is here.\par \par It creeps all over the house.\par \par I find it hovering in the dining-room, skulking in the parlor, hiding\par in the hall, lying in wait for me on the stairs.\par \par It gets into my hair.\par \par Even when I go to ride, if I turn my head suddenly and surprise\par it?there is that smell!\par \par Such a peculiar odor, too! I have spent hours in trying to analyze it,\par to find what it smelled like.\par \par It is not bad?at first, and very gentle, but quite the subtlest, most\par enduring odor I ever met.\par \par In this damp weather it is awful. I wake up in the night and find it\par hanging over me.\par \par It used to disturb me at first. I thought seriously of burning the\par house?to reach the smell.\par \par But now I am used to it. The only thing I can think of that it is like\par is the color of the paper! A yellow smell.\par \par There is a very funny mark on this wall, low down, near the mopboard. A\par streak that runs round the room. It goes behind every piece of\par furniture, except the bed, a long, straight, even smooch, as if it had\par been rubbed over and over.\par \par I wonder how it was done and who did it, and what they did it for.\par Round and round and round?round and round and round?it makes me dizzy!\par \par I really have discovered something at last.\par \par Through watching so much at night, when it changes so, I have finally\par found out.\par \par The front pattern does move?and no wonder! The woman behind shakes it!\par \par Sometimes I think there are a great many women behind, and sometimes\par only one, and she crawls around fast, and her crawling shakes it all\par over.\par \par Then in the very bright spots she keeps still, and in the very shady\par spots she just takes hold of the bars and shakes them hard.\par \par And she is all the time trying to climb through. But nobody could climb\par through that pattern?it strangles so; I think that is why it has so\par many heads.\par \par They get through, and then the pattern strangles them off and turns\par them upside-down, and makes their eyes white!\par \par If those heads were covered or taken off it would not be half so bad.\par \par I think that woman gets out in the daytime!\par \par And I?ll tell you why?privately?I?ve seen her!\par \par I can see her out of every one of my windows!\par \par It is the same woman, I know, for she is always creeping, and most\par women do not creep by daylight.\par \par I see her on that long shaded lane, creeping up and down. I see her in\par those dark grape arbors, creeping all around the garden.\par \par I see her on that long road under the trees, creeping along, and when a\par carriage comes she hides under the blackberry vines.\par \par I don?t blame her a bit. It must be very humiliating to be caught\par creeping by daylight!\par \par I always lock the door when I creep by daylight. I can?t do it at\par night, for I know John would suspect something at once.\par \par And John is so queer now, that I don?t want to irritate him. I wish he\par would take another room! Besides, I don?t want anybody to get that\par woman out at night but myself.\par \par I often wonder if I could see her out of all the windows at once.\par \par But, turn as fast as I can, I can only see out of one at one time.\par \par And though I always see her she may be able to creep faster than I can\par turn!\par \par I have watched her sometimes away off in the open country, creeping as\par fast as a cloud shadow in a high wind.\par \par If only that top pattern could be gotten off from the under one! I mean\par to try it, little by little.\par \par I have found out another funny thing, but I shan?t tell it this time!\par It does not do to trust people too much.\par \par There are only two more days to get this paper off, and I believe John\par is beginning to notice. I don?t like the look in his eyes.\par \par And I heard him ask Jennie a lot of professional questions about me.\par She had a very good report to give.\par \par She said I slept a good deal in the daytime.\par \par John knows I don?t sleep very well at night, for all I?m so quiet!\par \par He asked me all sorts of questions, too, and pretended to be very\par loving and kind.\par \par As if I couldn?t see through him!\par \par Still, I don?t wonder he acts so, sleeping under this paper for three\par months.\par \par It only interests me, but I feel sure John and Jennie are secretly\par affected by it.\par \par Hurrah! This is the last day, but it is enough. John is to stay in town\par over night, and won?t be out until this evening.\par \par Jennie wanted to sleep with me?the sly thing! but I told her I should\par undoubtedly rest better for a night all alone.\par \par That was clever, for really I wasn?t alone a bit! As soon as it was\par moonlight, and that poor thing began to crawl and shake the pattern, I\par got up and ran to help her.\par \par I pulled and she shook, I shook and she pulled, and before morning we\par had peeled off yards of that paper.\par \par A strip about as high as my head and half around the room.\par \par And then when the sun came and that awful pattern began to laugh at me\par I declared I would finish it to-day!\par \par We go away to-morrow, and they are moving all my furniture down again\par to leave things as they were before.\par \par Jennie looked at the wall in amazement, but I told her merrily that I\par did it out of pure spite at the vicious thing.\par \par She laughed and said she wouldn?t mind doing it herself, but I must not\par get tired.\par \par How she betrayed herself that time!\par \par But I am here, and no person touches this paper but me?not alive!\par \par She tried to get me out of the room?it was too patent! But I said it\par was so quiet and empty and clean now that I believed I would lie down\par again and sleep all I could; and not to wake me even for dinner?I would\par call when I woke.\par \par So now she is gone, and the servants are gone, and the things are gone,\par and there is nothing left but that great bedstead nailed down, with the\par canvas mattress we found on it.\par \par We shall sleep downstairs to-night, and take the boat home to-morrow.\par \par I quite enjoy the room, now it is bare again.\par \par How those children did tear about here!\par \par This bedstead is fairly gnawed!\par \par But I must get to work.\par \par I have locked the door and thrown the key down into the front path.\par \par I don?t want to go out, and I don?t want to have anybody come in, till\par John comes.\par \par I want to astonish him.\par \par I?ve got a rope up here that even Jennie did not find. If that woman\par does get out, and tries to get away, I can tie her!\par \par But I forgot I could not reach far without anything to stand on!\par \par This bed will not move!\par \par I tried to lift and push it until I was lame, and then I got so angry I\par bit off a little piece at one corner?but it hurt my teeth.\par \par Then I peeled off all the paper I could reach standing on the floor. It\par sticks horribly and the pattern just enjoys it! All those strangled\par heads and bulbous eyes and waddling fungus growths just shriek with\par derision!\par \par I am getting angry enough to do something desperate. To jump out of the\par window would be admirable exercise, but the bars are too strong even to\par try.\par \par Besides I wouldn?t do it. Of course not. I know well enough that a step\par like that is improper and might be misconstrued.\par \par I don?t like to look out of the windows even?there are so many of those\par creeping women, and they creep so fast.\par \par I wonder if they all come out of that wallpaper as I did?\par \par But I am securely fastened now by my well-hidden rope?you don?t get me\par out in the road there!\par \par I suppose I shall have to get back behind the pattern when it comes\par night, and that is hard!\par \par It is so pleasant to be out in this great room and creep around as I\par please!\par \par I don?t want to go outside. I won?t, even if Jennie asks me to.\par \par For outside you have to creep on the ground, and everything is green\par instead of yellow.\par \par But here I can creep smoothly on the floor, and my shoulder just fits\par in that long smooch around the wall, so I cannot lose my way.\par \par Why, there?s John at the door!\par \par It is no use, young man, you can?t open it!\par \par How he does call and pound!\par \par Now he?s crying for an axe.\par \par It would be a shame to break down that beautiful door!\par \par ?John dear!? said I in the gentlest voice, ?the key is down by the\par front steps, under a plantain leaf!?\par \par That silenced him for a few moments.\par \par Then he said?very quietly indeed, ?Open the door, my darling!?\par \par ?I can?t,? said I. ?The key is down by the front door under a plantain\par leaf!?\par \par And then I said it again, several times, very gently and slowly, and\par said it so often that he had to go and see, and he got it, of course,\par and came in. He stopped short by the door.\par \par ?What is the matter?? he cried. ?For God?s sake, what are you doing!?\par \par I kept on creeping just the same, but I looked at him over my shoulder.\par \par ?I?ve got out at last,? said I, ?in spite of you and Jane! And I?ve\par pulled off most of the paper, so you can?t put me back!?\par \par Now why should that man have fainted? But he did, and right across my\par path by the wall, so that I had to creep over him every time!\par \par \par \par \par *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE YELLOW WALLPAPER ***\par \par \par     \par \par Updated editions will replace the previous one?the old editions will\par be renamed.\par \par Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright\par law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,\par so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United\par States without permission and without paying copyright\par royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part\par of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project\par Gutenberg? electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG?\par concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,\par and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following\par the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use\par of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for\par copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very\par easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation\par of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project\par Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away?you may\par do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected\par by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark\par license, especially commercial redistribution.\par \par \par START: FULL LICENSE\par \par THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG? LICENSE\par \par PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK\par \par To protect the Project Gutenberg? mission of promoting the free\par distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work\par (or any other work associated in any way with the phrase ?Project\par Gutenberg?), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full\par Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at\par www.gutenberg.org/license.\par \par Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg\par electronic works\par \par 1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg\par electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to\par and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property\par (trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all\par the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or\par destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your\par possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a\par Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound\par by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person\par or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.\par \par 1.B. ?Project Gutenberg? is a registered trademark. It may only be\par used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who\par agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few\par things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works\par even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See\par paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project\par Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this\par agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg\par electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.\par \par 1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (?the\par Foundation? or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection\par of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual\par works in the collection are in the public domain in the United\par States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the\par United States and you are located in the United States, we do not\par claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,\par displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as\par all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope\par that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting\par free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg\par works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the\par Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily\par comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the\par same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when\par you share it without charge with others.\par \par 1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern\par what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are\par in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,\par check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this\par agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,\par distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any\par other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no\par representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any\par country other than the United States.\par \par 1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:\par \par 1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other\par immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear\par prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work\par on which the phrase ?Project Gutenberg? appears, or with which the\par phrase ?Project Gutenberg? is associated) is accessed, displayed,\par performed, viewed, copied or distributed:\par \par     This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most\par     other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions\par     whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms\par     of the Project Gutenberg? License included with this eBook or online\par     at www.gutenberg.org. If you\par     are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws\par     of the country where you are located before using this eBook.\par   \par 1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is\par derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not\par contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the\par copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in\par the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are\par redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase ?Project\par Gutenberg? associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply\par either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or\par obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg\par trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.\par \par 1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted\par with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution\par must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any\par additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms\par will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works\par posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the\par beginning of this work.\par \par 1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg\par License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this\par work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.\par \par 1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this\par electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without\par prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with\par active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project\par Gutenberg License.\par \par 1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,\par compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including\par any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access\par to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format\par other than ?Plain Vanilla ASCII? or other format used in the official\par version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website\par (www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense\par to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means\par of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original ?Plain\par Vanilla ASCII? or other form. Any alternate format must include the\par full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.\par \par 1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,\par performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works\par unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.\par \par 1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing\par access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works\par provided that:\par \par     ? You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from\par         the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method\par         you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed\par         to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has\par         agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project\par         Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid\par         within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are\par         legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty\par         payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project\par         Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in\par         Section 4, ?Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg\par         Literary Archive Foundation.?\par     \par     ? You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies\par         you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he\par         does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg?\par         License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all\par         copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue\par         all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg?\par         works.\par     \par     ? You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of\par         any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the\par         electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of\par         receipt of the work.\par     \par     ? You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free\par         distribution of Project Gutenberg? works.\par     \par \par 1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project\par Gutenberg? electronic work or group of works on different terms than\par are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing\par from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of\par the Project Gutenberg? trademark. Contact the Foundation as set\par forth in Section 3 below.\par \par 1.F.\par \par 1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable\par effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread\par works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project\par Gutenberg? collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg?\par electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may\par contain ?Defects,? such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate\par or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other\par intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or\par other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or\par cannot be read by your equipment.\par \par 1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the ?Right\par of Replacement or Refund? described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project\par Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project\par Gutenberg? trademark, and any other party distributing a Project\par Gutenberg? electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all\par liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal\par fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT\par LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE\par PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE\par TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE\par LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR\par INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH\par DAMAGE.\par \par 1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a\par defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can\par receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a\par written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you\par received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium\par with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you\par with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in\par lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person\par or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second\par opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If\par the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing\par without further opportunities to fix the problem.\par \par 1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth\par in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ?AS-IS?, WITH NO\par OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT\par LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.\par \par 1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied\par warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of\par damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement\par violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the\par agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or\par limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or\par unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the\par remaining provisions.\par \par 1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the\par trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone\par providing copies of Project Gutenberg? electronic works in\par accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the\par production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg?\par electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,\par including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of\par the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this\par or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or\par additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any\par Defect you cause.\par \par Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg\par \par Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of\par electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of\par computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It\par exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations\par from people in all walks of life.\par \par Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the\par assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg?s\par goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will\par remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project\par Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure\par and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future\par generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary\par Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see\par Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.\par \par Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation\par \par The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit\par 501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the\par state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal\par Revenue Service. The Foundation?s EIN or federal tax identification\par number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary\par Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by\par U.S. federal laws and your state?s laws.\par \par The Foundation?s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,\par Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up\par to date contact information can be found at the Foundation?s website\par and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact\par \par Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg\par Literary Archive Foundation\par \par Project Gutenberg? depends upon and cannot survive without widespread\par public support and donations to carry out its mission of\par increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be\par freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest\par array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations\par ($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt\par status with the IRS.\par \par The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating\par charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United\par States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a\par considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up\par with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations\par where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND\par DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state\par visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.\par \par While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we\par have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition\par against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who\par approach us with offers to donate.\par \par International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make\par any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from\par outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.\par \par Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation\par methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other\par ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To\par donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.\par \par Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works\par \par Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project\par Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be\par freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and\par distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of\par volunteer support.\par \par Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed\par editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in\par the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not\par necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper\par edition.\par \par Most people start at our website which has the main PG search\par facility: www.gutenberg.org.\par \par This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,\par including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary\par Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to\par subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.\par \par \par }
